docs: parser implementation guide (#2089)
biomejs/biome: crates/biome_parser/CONTRIBUTING.md

# Parser

This document will explain how to contribute to creating a new Parser with Biome.

## Grammar

Everything starts with writing the grammar for the language. We use a fork of [`ungrammar`](https://github.com/rust-analyzer/ungrammar), a simple DSL
for writing grammar for languages.

Internally, we have a codegen script that reads `.ungram` files and all the files needed to write a parser.

### Create a new language

From the root of this repository, head to `xtask/codegen` folder. That's where you'll start doing your work.

Let's say you want to create a new language that has the extension `html`, you'll have to follow these instructions:

1. Create a new `html.ungram` file in this folder.
   Add this legend to the `.ungram` file.

  ```

>   // This grammar specifies the structure of Rust's concrete syntax tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // This grammar specifies the structure of [LANGUAGE]'s concrete syntax tree.
```

  //   Name =                -- non-terminal definition
  //   'ident'               -- token (terminal)
  //   A B                   -- sequence
  //   A | B                 -- alternation
  //   A*                    -- zero or more repetition
  //   (A (',' A)* ','?)            -- repetition of node A separated by ',' and allowing a trailing comma
  //   (A (',' A)*)             -- repetition of node A separated by ',' without a trailing comma
  //   A?                    -- zero or one repetition
  //   (A)                   -- same as A
  //   label:A               -- suggested name for field of AST node
  ```
1. Create a new file called `src/html_kinds_src.rs`. This file must return a static `KindSrc`.
1. Create two new crates: `biome_html_syntax` and `biome_html_factory`. Use `cargo new --lib crates/biome_html_syntax`.
1. Create a `generated/` folder inside the `src/` folder of the newly created crates.
1. Add a new variant to `LanguageKind`, inside `language_kind.rs` file. The new variant will be `Html`. You'll have to implement
   all methods and cover the new variant.
1. Add a new prefix `html_` to `LANGUAGE_PREFIXES` inside `language_kind.rs`.

> 1. Once you covered all variants, run the command `cargo codegen grammar`.

Reviewer 2: list item number should be increasing

Author: That's the trick, if you leave them to all `1` they will be automatically **rendered** with increased numbers :) 

This means that if you need to add a new item to the list, you don't need to update all the numbers. Check the [rendered document](https://github.com/biomejs/biome/blob/docs/better-parser-contribution-guide/crates/biome_parser/CONTRIBUTING.md#create-a-new-language)

Reviewer 2: 🤯 I just learned new tricks.

```rust, ignore
if !p.at(T![if]) && !p.at(T![else]){
  return Absent
}
```

Your implementation can also call into another parsing rule if the first child is a node and not a token.

```rust, ignore
let assignment_target = parse_assignment_target(p);

if assignment_target.is_absent() {
  return Absent;
}

let my_node = assignment_target.precede_or_missing();
```

But be careful with calling other rules. Your rule mustn't progress the parser - meaning that it can't
advance in the parsing process and consume tokens - if it returns `Absent`.

#### Parse children
The parse rules will guide you in how to write your implementation and the parser infrastructure provides the following convenience APIs:

* Optional token `'ident'?`: Use `p.eat(token)`. It eats the next token if it matches the passed-in token.
* Required token `'ident'`: Use`p.expect(token)`. It eats the next token if it matches the passed-in token.
It adds an `Expected 'x' but found 'y' instead` error and a missing marker if the token isn't present in the source code.

> * Optional node `body: JsBlockStatement?`: Use`parse_block_statement(p).or_missing(p)`. It parses the block if it is present in the source code and adds a missing marker if it isn't.

Reviewer 3: Question: When is `or_missing()` actually necessary? I’ve found missing markers for optional nodes to be added automatically so far.

Author: Docs are **outdated** :D 

I just copied the content form `lib.rs`. Happy to review it later

* Required node `body: JsBlockStatement`: Use `parse_block_statement(p).or_missing_with_error(p, error_builder)`:
it parses the block statement if it is present in the source code and adds a missing marker and an error if not.

Using the above-described rules result in the following implementation for the `if` statement rule.

```rust, ignore
fn parse_if_statement(p: &mut Parser) -> ParsedSyntax {
 if !p.at(T![if]) {
  return Absent;
 }

 let m = p.start();

 p.expect(T![if]);
 p.expect(T!['(']);
 parse_any_expression(p).or_add_diagnostic(p, js_parse_errors::expeced_if_statement);
 p.expect(T![')']);
 parse_block_statement(p).or_add_diagnostic(p, js_parse_errors::expected_block_statement);
// the else block is optional, handle the marker by using `ok`
 parse_else_clause(p).ok();

 Present(m.complete(p, JS_IF_STATEMENT));
}
```

Hold on, what are these *missing* markers? Biome's AST facade uses fixed offsets to retrieve a particular child from a node.
For example, the 3rd child of the if statement is the condition. However, the condition would become the second element
if the opening parentheses `(` isn't present in the source text. That's where missing elements come into play.

> ### Parsing Lists & Error Recovery

Author: Thank you. I will follow up with another PR :)

The general structure for parsing a list is (yes, that's something the parser infrastructure should provide for you):

Let's try to parse an array:

```js
[ 1, 3, 6 ]
```

We will use  `ParseSeparatedList` in order to achieve that

```rust, ignore
struct ArrayElementsList;

impl ParseSeparatedList for ArrayElementsList {
    type ParsedElement = CompletedMarker;

    fn parse_element(&mut self, p: &mut Parser) -> ParsedSyntax<Self::ParsedElement> {
        parse_array_element(p)
    }

    fn is_at_list_end(&self, p: &mut Parser) -> bool {
        p.at_ts(token_set![T![default], T![case], T!['}']])
    }

    fn recover(
        &mut self,
        p: &mut Parser,
        parsed_element: ParsedSyntax<Self::ParsedElement>,
    ) -> parser::RecoveryResult {
        parsed_element.or_recover(
            p,
            &ParseRecoveryTokenSet::new(JS_BOGUS_STATEMENT, STMT_RECOVERY_SET),
            js_parse_error::expected_case,
        )
    }
};
```

Let's run through this step by step:

```rust, ignore
parsed_element.or_recover(
    p,
    &ParseRecoveryTokenSet::new(JS_BOGUS_STATEMENT, STMT_RECOVERY_SET),

>     js_parse_error::expected_case,

Reviewer 3: The docs say we’re parsing an array, but the example seems to be for switch statements?

Author: Definitely outdate, I will take care of it later
